Even though Parisa Ahmadi was in the top of her class at the all-girls Hatifi
High School in Herat, Afghanistan, her family was initially against her enrolling
in classes being offered by a private venture that promised to teach young girls
Internet and social-media skills—and even pay them for their efforts. “Here in
Afghanistan a woman’s life is limited by her room’s walls and school,” she
wrote in an e-mail. In Afghanistan, girls are not exposed to the Internet, not at
home and not at school. That’s the way it might have stayed, too, if Ahmadi
hadn’t persisted. She was a top student, and she wanted to take even more
classes. In her mind, that was reason enough. She pressed her family, by her own
admission, “a lot.”
The venture backing these classes is the Film Annex, a U.S.-based arts group
that uses social media and an online site to pay the three hundred thousand
bloggers and filmmakers who contribute their work. Film Annex ended up in
Afghanistan by way of its direct affiliation with the Women’s Annex, a digital
literacy program set up in conjunction with Afghan businesswoman Roya
Mahboob, which now educates fifty thousand girls in schools across
Afghanistan. Mahboob is something of a celebrity; named one of the one
hundred most influential people in the world by Time magazine, she runs a
software company called Afghan Citadel, is one of the few female CEOs in
Afghanistan, and has made education for Afghani women her central cause. The
Women’s Annex sets up its classrooms in local high schools, and the classes are
taught by women. Because of this last feature, Ahmadi’s family finally relented
and let her sign up.
Ahmadi started taking classes in 2013. She and her classmates were learning
about the World Wide Web, social media, and blogs. A movie lover who also
loved to write about the movies that moved her, she began posting on a blog, and
its members responded positively to her reviews, earning her the first real
income of her young life.
Still, one of the other things most girls don’t have in Afghanistan is a bank
account. If the Afghani teen ever had any money, she had to transfer it into her
father’s or brothers’ bank accounts, and that’s simply the way it is for most girls
where she lives. In this sense, she was lucky—for many women from her
background male family members block them from access to their funds and
treat the money as their own.
Ahmadi’s luck would change in early 2014. The Film Annex’s New York–
based founder, Francesco Rulli, aware of the difficulty faced by women like
Ahmadi and frustrated by the transaction costs he incurred in sending relatively
small amounts of money around the world, implemented a sweeping change to
the Film Annex’s payment system. He would pay his bloggers in bitcoin, the
digital currency that had seemed to come out of nowhere in 2013, with a small,
fiercely dedicated band of tech-minded, libertarian-leaning digital utopians
acting as its standard-bearers, and swearing to anybody who’d listen that it was
going to change the world.
Rulli, driven by a philosophy that’s a sort of bootstrap capitalism, soon “got”
bitcoin and gleaned the advantages it could have for people like Ahmadi, who
was one of more than seven thousand young Afghani women listed as paid
contributors to the Film Annex. Bitcoins are stored in digital bank accounts or
“wallets” that can be set up at home by anyone with Internet access. There is no
trip to the bank to set up an account, no need for documentation or proof that
you’re a man. Indeed, bitcoin does not know your name or gender, so it allows
women in patriarchal societies, at least those with access to the Internet, to
control their own money. The importance of this cannot be overstated. These
women are building something that is theirs, not their fathers’ or brothers’.
While not a panacea, this blast of cutting-edge, twenty-first-century technology
offers real promise as a way to help unshackle an entire swath of the human
population.
Many Film Annex contributors in the United States, the United Kingdom,
Italy, and other rich countries grumbled about the inconvenience of the digital
currency. Few businesses, online or otherwise, accepted it for payment, and to
many the whole thing seemed dodgy. The complaints aren’t unique to Film
Annex contributors; to many people bitcoin seems like a half-baked scam, some
scheme to sucker fools out of their money. Moreover, Ahmadi contends with the
same issues related to bitcoin that her peers in other countries had grumbled
about, in particular that the options for spending it are still limited, especially in
an economy as underdeveloped as Afghanistan’s. To deal with such problems,
the Film Annex set up an e-commerce site in 2014 allowing its members to trade
bitcoins for gift cards from global sites such as Amazon that will ship to Kabul,
Herat, and other Afghan cities. In effect, Film Annex is creating its own selfenclosed bitcoin economy, an approach it reinforced by changing its trade name
to BitLanders.
Ahmadi used her bitcoins to buy a new laptop. Only a few years ago, this
would have been impossible. She credits bitcoin with “teaching us how to be
independent and how to decide by our own, and best of all, how to stand on our
own feet.” It’s allowed her to ponder a future in which she isn’t merely an
appendage to the men in her life, a future in which she can chart her own course.
“I see myself an educated and active female doctor in the future,” she said.
*
You don’t typically read stories like Ahmadi’s in press coverage of bitcoin. Most
of it has focused on the roller-coaster ride of what’s seen as a suspect monetary
concept. Ask people on the street what they know about bitcoin, and if they can
answer anything at all, they’ll likely cite the most prominent of those press
reports. They’ll say something about drug dealers who were busted using bitcoin
on the illicit Silk Road Web site. Or they’ll refer to volatile price movements and
utter the word bubble. Or they might recall the sudden vanishing of a large
number of bitcoins from a thing with the Dr. Seuss–esque name of Mt. Gox,
knowing little more than that it was an obscure online exchange in Tokyo.
Perhaps they know of the search for Satoshi Nakamoto, the shadowy figure who
created bitcoin.
All of these elements of the circus sideshow that has arisen around bitcoin
are both colorful and important to understanding its story. But to dismiss it as a
con because of them is to turn your back on something that may well change
your life. Bitcoin is a groundbreaking digital technology with the potential to
radically change the way we conduct banking and commerce, and to bring
billions of people from the emerging markets into a modern, integrated,
digitized, globalized economy. If it works—and that’s still a big if—an awful lot
of things that today seem like part of the natural state of the world are going to
look as antiquated as Gutenberg’s printing press.
The system we use now for managing exchanges of currency and assets dates
back to the time of the Medici family of the Florentine Renaissance, when banks
first assumed dominance in the monetary economy of Europe. These guys were
the ultimate technological disrupters, radical thinkers who discovered a vital
need in society and then filled it. In essence, they figured out how to
intermediate between savers and borrowers, bringing in the excess capital of the
former and parceling it out to those among the latter who needed it—all for a
fee. This was a dramatic version of what a Silicon Valley investor would these
days call a network efficiency. By bringing society’s myriad debts and claims
into the central ledger of a single bank, the bankers created a powerful, new
centralized system of trust. With the help of their specialized intermediating
services, strangers that previously had no way of trusting each other enough to
do business could now do so. In effect, the Medici created a high-powered
system of money creation—money being not a physical currency but a system
for organizing, expanding, and sharing society’s debts and payments. It made
way for an explosion in mercantile trade, which in turn created the wealth and
capital that would finance the projects from which great civilizations would
grow and conquer the world.
But … by creating this centralized system of trust and then putting
themselves in the middle of it, banks became extremely powerful—eventually,
too much so. Since strangers could not do business with each other without the
banks, the world’s increasingly complex and interconnected economies became
utterly dependent on the bankers’ intermediation. The ledgers they kept inside
their institutions became the vital means through which societies kept track of
the debts and payments that arose among their citizens. Thus the banks created
the ultimate rent-seeking business, positioning themselves as fee-charging
gatekeepers, managers of the financial traffic that made economies tick. Anyone
sitting at the sending or receiving end of that traffic had no choice but to deal
with a bank—much as Parisa Ahmadi did before the Film Annex changed its
payment policy. As this new finance business grew and became more complex,
other rent-seeking middlemen installed themselves as specialized providers of
intermediated trust—from early bond and securities brokers, to insurance agents,
to financial lawyers, to the payment processors and credit-card companies of our
modern day. As it currently works, our high-charged global economic system
would collapse if these middlemen stopped doing what they do. All of this has
simply made the banks at the center of it all even more powerful, so much so
that eventually a system that first empowered people has fostered a dangerous
dependence upon them. This is what gave rise to the behemoths of Wall Street,
which would ultimately take the world to the brink of disaster in 2008.
Enter cryptocurrency—the category to which bitcoin belongs. The simple
genius of this technology is that it cuts away the middleman yet maintains an
infrastructure that allows strangers to deal with each other. It does this by taking
the all-important role of ledger-keeping away from centralized financial
institutions and handing it to a network of autonomous computers, creating a
decentralized system of trust that operates outside the control of any one
institution. At their core, cryptocurrencies are built around the principle of a
universal, inviolable ledger, one that is made fully public and is constantly being
verified by these high-powered computers, each essentially acting independently
of the others. In theory, that means we don’t need banks and other financial
intermediaries to form bonds of trust on our behalf. The network-based ledger—
which in the case of most cryptocurrencies is called a blockchain—works as a
standin for the middlemen since it can just as effectively tell us whether the
counterparty to a transaction is good for his or her money.
By eliminating middlemen and their fees, cryptocurrency promises to reduce
the costs of doing business and to mitigate corruption inside those intermediating
institutions as well as from the politicians who are drawn into their prosperous
orbit. The public ledgers used by cryptocurrencies can bring into the open the
inner workings of an economic-political system that was previously hidden
within impenetrable, centralized institutions. Indeed, the technology’s potential
as a force for transparency and accountability goes far beyond money and
payments, as it can strip out information-controlling middlemen from many
other forms of human exchange—in elections, for example, where
cryptocurrency enthusiasts see the capacity to end vote-rigging. At its core, this
technology is a form of social organization that promises to shift the control of
money and information away from the powerful elites and deliver it to the
people to whom it belongs, putting them back in charge of their assets and
talents.
If we listen to Mike’s neighbor, Scott Robbins—the same Scott of Pelham,
New York, whose Middle American skepticism toward globalization also helped
ground the introduction to The Unfair Trade—it’s clear that many middle-class
Westerners struggle to grasp how all this might improve their own lives. “I just
don’t understand why I should give a damn about bitcoin,” Scott said one
evening. And sure, if we focus narrowly on, say, the 2 or 3 percent savings that
bitcoin offers on each credit-card transaction fee—a benefit that would typically
go to merchants—it’s hard to get excited about a “cryptocurrency revolution.”
But when we consider that world economic output runs to $87 trillion a year,
and think of how much of that is hived off by the same banks and financial tollcollectors that cryptocurrencies bypass, it’s possible to imagine many trillions of
dollars in savings. Each of us can stake a claim on those funds, indirectly via the
employment and income opportunities that businesses might create with what
they save on financial costs, or directly via the lower interest rates, bank fees,
and transaction charges by our bank and credit-card accounts. The day you
started earning and spending money is the day you began repeatedly handing
over slices of that money to these middlemen, often adding up to millions of
dollars over a single person’s lifetime. Cryptocurrency promises to stop that
outflow and put the money back in your pocket. This, in the most basic way, is
bitcoin’s value proposition—the “Why should I care?” that Scott was looking
for.
Cryptocurrency is certainly not without flaws and risks. Some fear that if we
follow bitcoin’s model, its mechanism for incentivizing computer owners to
maintain and manage the public ledger—which drives them to compete for
batches of newly issued bitcoins every ten minutes—could encourage a
politically disruptive concentration of computing power. So, even as bitcoin
aims to decentralize monetary power, capitalism’s innate monopolizing
tendencies could lead some players to accumulate enough computing power to
seize control of the network and revert a trustworthy, decentralized system back
to one where self-interested, centralized institutions are in control. Bitcoin is not
currently under such a threat, and many believe it would never arise because
computer owners who profit from owning bitcoins have no interest in destroying
it. Still, the threat cannot be fully eliminated.
Also, bitcoin and crime have been associated, as seen in the Silk Road case,
where users sought to exploit the digital currency’s anonymity to sell drugs and
launder money. Some worry, too, that bitcoin could foment economic crises
because it strips government policymakers of the capacity to adjust the money
supply and to offset people’s instinct to hoard it at times of mass panic. We will
examine these important concerns and show how the community of people
working on bitcoin is already addressing them.
There’s no getting around that cryptocurrency is a highly disruptive
technology. All else being equal, technological disruption makes an economy
more efficient and creates more wealth overall. But it is never painless. That will
clearly be evident if cryptocurrency takes hold. It will unleash political tensions
as millions who’ve made their living from the old system wake up to find their
jobs are at risk. That backlash is already building, even before the technology is
properly established, as we’ll witness in the struggles and debates that arise in
the chapters to follow. The political conflict is not only between those who cling
to the old system and those who support the new one, but also within the ranks
of the latter group, as idealists, pragmatists, entrepreneurs, and opportunists
compete to control cryptocurrency’s future.
When disruption is driven by a technology associated with money, these
clashes can be especially intense. However, when the knives are out—
metaphorically; we’re not yet aware of any bitcoin-related assassinations—it’s
often a good sign that something big is happening.
Former U.S. treasury secretary Larry Summers has grasped this. “If you
think about what a modern economy is all about, it basically involves ever more
exchange,” he told us. “And exchange, unless it can be literally simultaneous,
always has real issues of trust. So, what the breakthrough in communications and
computer science represented in bitcoin does is to support deeper exchange at
lower price. And that matters both within countries for the traditionally excluded
and it also matters across international borders.”
The “issues of trust” to which Summers refers are the core problem that the
Medici bankers first sought to solve, the dilemma that strangers face when they
seek to do business with each other. When Summers talks of “the traditionally
excluded,” he’s making an oblique reference to the “unbanked,” the Parisa
Ahmadis of the world, the roughly 2.5 billion people from Afghanistan to Africa
to even America who have been shut out of the modern finance system, who
don’t have bank accounts with verifiable balances, or credit histories, or any of
the requirements banks impose for us to do business through them. Without
access to banking, they are essentially shut out of the modern economy.
At its core, cryptocurrency is not about the ups and downs of the digital
currency market; it’s not even about a new unit of exchange to replace the dollar
or the euro or the yen. It’s about freeing people from the tyranny of centralized
trust. It speaks to the tantalizing prospect that we can take power away from the
center—away from banks, governments, lawyers, and the tribal leaders of
Afghanistan—and transfer it to the periphery, to We, the People.
*
So, what exactly is bitcoin? It gets a little confusing because people refer to two
different things when they talk about bitcoin. The first is the feature that has got
the most attention: bitcoin the currency, the digital units of value that are used
by people in exchange for goods and services or other currencies, and whose
price tends to swing wildly against traditional government-issued currencies. But
that narrow definition distracts from a broader one that captures bitcoin’s far
more important contribution, and that is bitcoin the technology—or, as some
prefer to write it in text, Bitcoin, with a capital B (with the currency always
referred to with a lower-case b).*
At its core, bitcoin the technology refers to the system’s protocol, a common
phrase in software terminology that describes a fundamental set of programming
instructions that allow computers to communicate with each other. Bitcoin’s
protocol is run over a network of computers that belong to the many people
around the world that are charged with maintaining its core blockchain ledger
and monetary system. It provides those computers with the operating
instructions and information they need to keep track of and verify transactions
among people operating within the bitcoin economy. The system employs
encryption, which lets users key in special passwords to send digital money
directly to each other without revealing those passwords to any person or
institution. Just as important, it lays out the steps that computers in the network
must perform to reach a consensus on the validity of each transaction. Once that
consensus has been reached, a payee knows that the payer has sufficient funds—
that the payer isn’t sending counterfeit digital money.
Now, here’s what gets techies, economists, and futurists most excited about
bitcoin the technology. They see its open-source protocol as a foundation on
which to develop new tools for doing commerce and for managing exchanges.
You can think of it as an operating system. (Because it’s based on open-source
software, we’d use the analogy of Linux for PCs or Google’s Android for
smartphones rather than Microsoft’s Windows or Apple’s iOS.) The difference
is that bitcoin’s operating system is not providing instructions to a single
computer on how to run itself but to a network of computers on how to interact
with each other. Its core features are its decentralized model of “trustless” proof
and an automatically generated database that contains every transaction ever
completed, is made available to everyone in real time, and can never be
tampered with. Just as mobile-app makers are busy building applications on top
of Android, develo